=head1 NAME

cqp - The CWB Corpus Query Processor (interactive or slave-process version)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cqp> [-eC] [-hvmpscixS] [-D I<corpus>] [-r I<registry_dir>] [-l I<data_dir>]
    [-I I<init_file>] [-M I<macro_file>] [-f I<script_file>] [-P I<pager>]
    [-W I<num>] [-L I<num>] [-R I<num>] [-b I<num>] [-d I<mode>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<Corpus Query Processor> or CQP is the central component of the B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench>.

CQP is a fast, flexible concordancer with an extremely powerful and I<de facto> standardised
search syntax. 

Queries are evaluated as regular expressions at two levels. At the I<string> level,
the values of corpus attributes at particular positions in the corpus's token stream are matched
against regular expressions using PCRE (I<Perl Compatible Regular Expressions>). As well as 
providing access to a very popular dialect of regex (that of the Perl scripting language), PCRE
makes available the full set of Unicode character properties, if the underlying corpus is encoded 
as UTF-8.

String-level regex matches against p-attributes can be combined using Boolean logic to build a 
specification for a single token. Regular expression operators can then be applied to the token
specifiers, creating a second level of regex syntax - the level of the token sequence - at which
regex operators apply to tokens in the same way that they apply to characters in string-based regex.
Token-sequence regexes are evaluated by being compiled into finite state automata. 

All this, in short, makes CQP-syntax one of the most powerful query languages available. 

CQP can be run either as an interactive application, or as a "child mode" (a.k.a. slave mode)
process. The latter is typical when CQP is being used as the back-end to a program providing
a friendlier user-interface, for instance over the web. In both cases the command syntax is
the same. 

This manual file describes only the invocation of CQP from the command line. For
information on the syntax of commands, the variables that can be set within CQP's internal environment,
and the types of queries that can be run, please refer to the CWB project's I<CQP Tutorial> document.



=head1 OPTIONS

Please note that CQP does not currently support GNU-style C<--long-options>.


=over 4

=item B<-b> I<num>

Sets a hard boundary for the kleene star in token-sequence regular expressions (I<not> string-matching
regular expressions). Matches will be made across no more than I<num> tokens. 
This is basically the same as adding a C<within I<num>> clause to the CQP query; 
an explicit C<within> clause overrides the hard boundary, if specified.
If this option is not used, the hard boundary is set to a default of 500 tokens.

Equivalent to the interactive command C<set HardBoundary I<num>>.  

=item B<-c>    

Puts CQP into child-process mode (or, to use a less nurture-centric metaphor, I<slave mode>). This mode is 
optimised for programmatic control by a scripting language such as Perl or PHP. As such, the interface
becomes much more plaintext-friendly than in interactive mode.

Putting CQP into child mode: 

=over 4

=item (a) 

dispenses with user-friendly messages and boilerplate on standard-output or standard-error
(equivalently to the interactive command C<set Silent on>); 

=item (b) 

turns off the use of a pager for concordance output
(equivalently to the interactive command C<set Paging off> or to the B<-p> option);
 
=item (c) 

turns off highlighting of the match in concordance output
(equivalently to the interactive command C<set Highlighting off>); 

=item (d) 

turns off automatic printing of concordances after query evaluation
(equivalently to the interactive command C<set AutoShow off>); 

=item (e) 

turns off auto-saving of queries and other subcorpora
(equivalently to the interactive command C<set AutoSave off>);

=item (f) 

switches the display of the progress-bar from a pretty-printed format 
on standard-error to a simple format on stadnard-output. 

=back

=item B<-C>

Enables the use of ANSI colour codes, when CQP is running in a terminal that supports these codes.
When this "colourful" mode is enabled, different parts of a concordance, for example, will be highlighted
in different font and/or background colours. This is only possible (or of use) in interactive mode.

Note that this functionality is I<experimental>, and this option is not available in Windows.

=item B<-d> I<mode>      

Configures CQP's debug mode, which determines what messages concerning CQP's internal doings will be printed. Most users
should avoid using this option and thus stick with the default values, which in most cases means no messages printed;
however, using this option can help in writing bug reports that pin down the cause of a problem as precisely as possible.

I<mode> must be one of the following: 

=over 4

=item CLDebug 

Activates debug messages from the Corpus Library (low-level data access functions, including the regex engine).

=item DebugSimulation

Activates debug messages from the function that simulates a query's nondeterministic finite automaton. 

=item EvalDebug

Activates assorted debug messages related to query evaluation.

=item InitialMatchlistDebug

Activates debug messages relating to the retrieval of an initial set of possible matches based on searching for a particular 
form on a particular p-attribute.

=item MacroDebug

Activates debug messages related to the process of expanding macros;
plus also causes a set of Macro Hash Statistics to be printed when CQP shuts down.

=item ParseOnly

Puts CQP into a mode where it will only parse queries, not actually evaluate them (handy for debugging queries that would
take a very long time to actually run repeatedly).

=item ParserDebug

Turns on the CQP-syntax command parser's internal Bison-generated debug setting.

=item SearchDebug

Activates pretty-printing of evaluation trees when a search pattern is executed.

=item ShowCompDFA

Shows the complete deterministic finite automaton when printing an evaluation environment.

=item ShowDFA

Activates a printout of the state of a query pattern's deterministic finite automaton.

=item ShowEvaltree

Shows the evaluation tree when printing an evaluation environment.

=item ShowGConstraints

Shows the tree of global contraints when printing an evaluation environment.

=item ShowPatList

Shows the pattern list when printing an evaluation environment.

=item ShowSymtab

Has no effect at present.

=item SymtabDebug

Prints additional messages about the symbol table for labels in the evaluation environment when 
debugging the simulation of a query's nondeterministic finite automaton.

Only takes effect if DebugSimulation is also active.

=item TreeDebug 

Embeds extra messages when an evaluation tree is pretty-printed.

=item VerboseParser

When this is set, absolutely all messages from the CQP-syntax command parser get printed.

=item ALL

Activates all types of debug message listed above, but does I<not> turn on ParseOnly mode.

=back

Some debug messages are printed to CQP's standard-out (e.g. TreeDebug); others are printed to standard-error (e.g. CLDebug). 

Note that each of these modes, except C<ALL>, works as a I<toggle> to the default setting; so specifying I<mode> will turn I<mode> 
on if its default mode is off, and off if its default setting is on - the phrasing given
above assumes the former situation. The B<-d> option can be specified multiple times, and its effects are cumulative. 
So if you want debug messages from the CL and from the DFA module, for instance, you would specify C<-d ShowDFA -d CLDebug>.

Each of the debug options can also be turned on or off interactively, using the CQP commands C<set I<mode> on> and
C<set I<mode> off> respectively. These settings work the same way as all other CQP-internal configuration settings.

The B<-d> option only works when C<Silent> mode is not switched on. For example, in child mode,
C<Silent> is turned on, so once in child mode CQP will ignore the B<-d> option. 

=item B<-D> I<corpus>

Sets the default corpus on startup to I<corpus>.

=item B<-e>

Enables input line editing. Without this option, each interactive CQP command or query must be typed without errors 
(because backspace won't work). With this option, you get useful goodies like tab-completion, a command history,
and so on. You should only use this option in interactive mode. 

=item B<-f> I<script_file>

Puts CQP into I<batch mode>. In this mode, CQP will take command input from I<script_file>,
rather than interacting with the user. 

A CQP batch file is simply a text file containing a sequence of commands and/or qeuries to be 
carried out by CQP. CQP batch files may also contain comment lines - these must begin in a #; everything 
from the # to the next linebreak is a comment and is thus ignored by the CQP parser.

=item B<-h>

Displays the CQP help message with short information about the usage of the command line options.  
This usage message will be also shown if CQP is called with invalid options.
After the usage message is printed, CQP will exit.

=item B<-i>           

Switches CQP into "binary output" mode. In this mode, actual concordances are not printed in concordance output.
Instead, only a pair of integer corpus positions are printed for each match or each corpus segment
(note, this does not mean I<integers printed in ASCII decimals>, it actually means I<literally binary integers written
to the output stream>.)

This option also turns off all printing of debug messages.

This option is depracated and may (will probably) be removed in future versions of CQP.

=item B<-I> I<init_file>

Sets I<init_file> as the initialisation file. If the B<-I> option is not used, then I<in interactive mode only>
CQP will look for the default initialisation file: 
C<$HOME/.cqprc> under Unix, or C<%HOMEDRIVE%%HOMEPATH%\.cqprc> under Windows. 

An initialisation file contains a series of commands in the normal CQP syntax that will run automatically
on startup.

=item B<-l> I<data_dir>

Sets I<data_dir> as the active directory for subcorpus files to be stored in and loaded from.
This includes saved queries. Actual file read access is implicit: a query is loaded from disk
when necessary to fulfil a command referencing that query. File write is controlled by 
the interactive command C<save>.

This option is equivalent to the interactive command C<set DataDirectory I<dir>>.

=item B<-L> I<num>

Sets the amount of left-hand context to be displayed in concordances; 
I<num> characters to the left of the match will be shown.

(See B<-W> for details.)

=item B<-m>

Disables the expansion of user-defined macros in CQP queries.

=item B<-M> I<macro_file>

Specifies that user macro definitions should be read from I<file>. For more on user macros, see the I<CQP Tutorial>.

=item B<-p>           

Turns off the use of an external pager program (such as B<less>) to display the output from a concordance.
In this mode, concordance output is sent directly to the user's terminal. 

Equivalent to the interactive command C<set Paging off>.

=item B<-P> I<pager>     

Sets I<pager> as the external pager program that CQP will use to display query results. 

In CQP's interactive mode, concordances are not simply printed to the user's terminal. Rather, they are
piped through to a specified external tool, the I<pager>, whose role is to present the concordance output to
the user, normally one screenful at a time.

The default pager is either B<more> or B<less>, depending on the operating system. This option can be used
either to specify a different pager, or to specify a differently-configured call to the usual pager. 

The pager may also be set by the environment variable C<CQP_PAGER>.

Equivalent to the interactive command C<set Pager I<pager>>.

=item B<-r> I<registry_dir>

Specifies that the registry directory should be I<registry_dir> on startup,
instead of the standard registry. If this option is not specified, then a directory 
specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY environment variable will be used; if that is not available, 
the built-in CWB default will be used.

=item B<-R> I<num>

Sets the amount of right-hand context to be displayed in concordances; 
I<num> characters to the right of the match will be shown.

(See B<-W> for details.)

=item B<-s>         

Switches on auto-subquery mode. In this mode, whenever a query is executed, its result is set as
the current subcorpus. This means that subsequent queries will search I<only> the subset of the 
original corpus which falls within the matches of that earlier query - unless that query-subcorpus
is manually deactivated. 

Equivalent to the interactive command C<set AutoSubquery on>.

=item B<-S>

Switches the SIG_PIPE handler on or off (that is, toggles it from whatever its value was previously).
This option does not have any effect under Windows.

=item B<-v>

Shows program version and copyright information, then exits.

=item B<-W> I<num>       

Sets the width in characters of the context displayed when a concordance is printed. When this option is
specified, I<num> characters of left-hand context and I<num> characters of right-hand context will be
displayed.  The default width is 25 characters each way.

The amount of left- and right-hand context to display can be set separately using the B<-L> and B<-R> options.

Note that setting the context interactively allows you much more flexibility than the B<-L>, B<-W>
and B<-R> options : you can specify the width
of the context not only in characters, but also in tokens, or in terms of any suitable
s-attribute (i.e. XML element).

=item B<-x>           

Turns on CQP's insecure mode. In insecure mode, the use of pipes to external programs for certain functions 
(grouping, sorting, output-paging) is disallowed. ("Insecure mode" is thus "the mode for insecure circumstances"
I<not> "the mode that is insecure".) 

This option was previously recommended when CQP was slaved by a CGI script, to prevent input from the web from executing
arbitrary shell commands as pipes. However, a new and better way to achieve the same result is to use query-locking before
executing commands from untrusted sources. So while this option is retained for backwards-compatability, it should
not normally be used.

=back



=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item B<CQP_LOCAL_CORP_DIR>

If set, this environment variable specifies the active directory for subcorpus files to be stored in and loaded from.
This includes saved queries. For more information, see discussion of the B<-l> option, which does the same thing as this 
environment variable (but overrules it). 

Note that if this environment variable is not set I<and> the B<-l> option has not been used, it will not be possible
to save any queries until the active directory has been set manually using the interactive command 
C<set DataDirectory -I<dir>>.

=item B<CORPUS_REGISTRY>

If set, this environment variable specifies the location of the corpus registry directory. This
registry directory is scanned for available corpora when CQP starts up. 

The CORPUS_REGISTRY is overruled by the B<-r> option, if present; if neither of these means
of specifying the registry is used, then the built-in CWB default registry location will be used.

=item B<CQP_PAGER>

If set, this environment variable specifies a pager program that will be used to filter 
printed concordance output from CQP in interactive mode.

B<CQP_PAGER> overrules the built-in default pager, which is either B<more> or B<less>, 
depending on the operating system.

For more information, see discussion of the B<-P> option, which does the same thing as this 
environment variable (but overrules it). 

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqpserver>, L<cwb-align>, L<cwb-align-show>, L<cwb-align-encode>, L<cwb-align-decode>, L<cwb-atoi>, L<cwb-compress-rdx>, 
L<cwb-config>, L<cwb-decode-nqrfile>, L<cwb-decode>, L<cwb-describe-corpus>, L<cwb-encode>, L<cwb-huffcode>, 
L<cwb-itoa>, L<cwb-lexdecode>, L<cwb-makeall>, L<cwb-scan-corpus>, L<cwb-s-decode>, L<cwb-s-encode>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut

