=head1 NAME

cqpserver - A network daemon implementing the CQi interface (based on CQP)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cqpserver> [-hvmxS1Lq] [-D I<corpus>] [-r I<registry_dir>]
    [-l I<data_dir>] [-I I<init_file>] [-M I<macro_file>]
    [-b I<n>] [-d I<mode>] [-P I<port>] [<user>:<password> ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The CQPserver is a network daemon that listens on a specified port for commands 
that follow the CQi protocol. CQi allows the capabilities of CQP to be controlled
programmatically by another application, either locally or remotely. 

With a CQPserver running, other programs can make use of CQP as a backend without having to create 
a slave process controlled via pipes - slave processes being tricky in programming environments such as
Java.

Although it is controlled completely differently, the basic capabilities of B<cqpserver> are the same
as those of interactive-mode or slave-mode B<cqp>.

=head1 ACCESS CONTROL

In order to allow B<cqpserver> to accept connections from CQi clients, user accounts with appropriate
access permissions have to be declared, and valid remote hosts have to identified by IP address.

This is usually accomplished with the following CQP commands in the init file:

=over 4

=item B<user> I<username> "I<password>";

=item B<user> I<username> "I<password>" (I<CORPUS1> I<CORPUS2> ...);

Create user account with login I<username> and password I<password> (a quoted string).  User names must
be valid CWB identifiers.

The first version of the command gives the user access to all installed corpora.  The second version
restricts access to the specified list of corpora.

=item B<host> 141.58.127.100;

=item B<host> 141.58.127.*;

=item B<host> *;

Grant access to a specified remote host (numeric IPv4 address), an entire subnet, or all remote hosts.

=back

Alternatively, user accounts (without access restrictions) can be passed as command-line
arguments in the form I<username>:I<password>.  Remote hosts cannot be enabled from the
command line, but local connections can be allowed with the option C<-L>.


=head1 OPTIONS

Please note that CQP does not currently support GNU-style C<--long-options>.

B<cqpserver> takes most of the same options as B<cqp>. However, there are some exceptions.

The following options are available for B<cqp>, but not for B<cqpserver>: 

=over 4

B<-c>, B<-C>, B<-e>, B<-f>, B<-i>, B<-L>, B<-p>, B<-P>, B<-R>, B<-s>, B<-W>

=back

On the other hand, the following options are particular to B<cqpserver>:

=over 4

=item B<-1>

Starts the CQPserver in private-server mode: the server will accept one single connection from a client,
and then exit.

=item B<-L>

Makes the CQPserver accept connections from localhost (127.0.0.1) only (i.e. loopback mode). 

Please note that this is I<wholly different> from what B<-L> means as an option to b<cqp>!

=item B<-P> I<port>

Sets #I<port> as the port that the CQP server will listen on. The default port, if this option is not
specified, is given by the constant CQI_PORT in the code, which is currently defined as port 4877.

Please note that this is I<wholly different> from what B<-P> means as an option to b<cqp>!

=item B<-q>

When this option is set, the initial server process will fork itself and quit before accepting connections.
That is, the child server will persist in the background listening on its port, while the parent server exits, returning 
to the shell or program that called it. 
This makes it easy to start a CQPserver from a script and then carry on without waiting for the server to shut down.

This option has no effect on Windows.

=back

In addition, with B<cqpserver> the following extra debug modes can be activated with the shared B<-d> option: 

=over 4

=item ServerLog

Turns on logging of server messages; log entries are printed to B<cqpserver>'s standard-output.

=item ServerDebug

Turns on debug messages from the CQPserver module. 

=item Snoop 

Turns on monitoring of all CQi network traffic. A log of CQi communication is printed to B<cqpserver>'s standard-error.

=back




=head1 ENVIRONMENT

As with the options, B<cqpserver> recognises the same environment variables as B<cqp>, with the following
exceptions.

=over 4

CQP_PAGER is read in, but ignored, as B<cqpserver> does not use a pager.



=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqp>, L<cqpcl>, L<cwb-align>, L<cwb-align-show>, L<cwb-align-encode>, L<cwb-align-decode>, L<cwb-atoi>, L<cwb-compress-rdx>, 
L<cwb-config>, L<cwb-decode-nqrfile>, L<cwb-decode>, L<cwb-describe-corpus>, L<cwb-encode>, L<cwb-huffcode>, 
L<cwb-itoa>, L<cwb-lexdecode>, L<cwb-makeall>, L<cwb-scan-corpus>, L<cwb-s-decode>, L<cwb-s-encode>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut

