=head1 NAME

cwb-align-show - browse alignment files created by cwb-align

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cwb-align-show> [-Wh] [-w I<n>] [-s I<n>] [-r I<registry_dir>]
    [-P I<attribute>] I<alignment_file>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<cwb-align-show> is an interactive program for reviewing the output of B<cwb-align>.

B<cwb-align> produces an alignment file, that is, a file containing pairs of regions
judged to be equivalents across the two aligned corpora. B<cwb-align-show> allows the actual
content of these pairs of regions to be reviewed in a side-by-side format.

The program is invoked by specifying the alignment file to be displayed. Compressed alignment files
can be reviewed; any file whose name ends in C<.gz> will be automatically decompressed.

One region from the alignment file is shown at a time, with the region from the first corpus in the left-hand
column, and region from the second corpus in the right-hand column. Interactive commands (see below) are
used to move forwards through the file in steps of one or more regions. 

B<cwb-align-show> will look for the two aligned corpora in the registry directory, as usual. If a registry
location is not specified with the B<-r> option, then either a directory specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY
environment variable, or CWB's built-in default registry will be used.

=head1 OPTIONS

Please note that no CWB programs currently support GNU-style C<--long-options>.

=over 4

=item B<-h>

Displays B<cwb-align-show>'s help message, with short information about the usage of the command line options.  
This usage message will be also shown if B<cwb-align-show> is called with invalid options.
After the usage message is printed, B<cwb-align-show> will exit.

=item B<-P> I<attribute>

Specifies which positional attribute in the corpus should be displayed. 
By default, the C<word> attribute is shown. 

=item B<-r> I<registry_dir>

Specifies that the registry files for the two aligned corpora are located in I<registry_dir>,
instead of the standard registry. If this option is not specified, then a directory 
specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY environment variable will be used; if that is not available, 
the built-in CWB default will be used.

=item B<-s> I<n>

Sets the width of the separator between the two columns in B<cwb-align-show>'s display to I<n> characters.
The default width of the column separator is 2.

=item B<-w> I<n>

Sets the width of the two columns in B<cwb-align-show>'s display to I<n> characters.
The default width of each column is 38.

=item B<-W>

With the default values for the widths of the columns and column separator (see above), 
B<cwb-align-show>'s display will fit within an 80-character space (i.e. it will
fit in a traditional small terminal). Specifying the B<-W> option sets alternative defaults 
that expand the display, up to 116 characters; you should not use this option unless your 
terminal is big enough for such lines!

Note that -W is equivalent to C<-w 55 -s 6>.

=back


=head1 INTERACTIVE COMMANDS

Once in interactive mode, the following commands are available for browsing the alignment file.

=over 4

=item B<RETURN key>

Shows the next aligned region.

=item B<p> I<n>  

Prints the next I<n> aligned regions.

=item B<s> I<n>

Skips past the next I<n> regions (and prints the first region after the regions skipped).

=item B<h>

Shows the online help (an abbreviated version of this list of commands).

=item B<q> or B<x>   

Exits the program.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqp>, L<cqpserver>, L<cwb-align>, L<cwb-align-encode>, L<cwb-align-decode>, L<cwb-describe-corpus>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

=over 4

=item
B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

=item
Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

=item
Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

=back

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut

