=head1 NAME

cwb-s-decode - Decodes a single structural attribute of a CWB corpus

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cwb-s-decode> [-nvh] [-r I<registry_dir>] I<corpus> -S I<attribute>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This utility decodes the binary format of an encoded CWB structural attribute
(s-attribute) into a textual output format, and prints it to standard output.

An s-attribute is made up of a series of regions, where each region has a start point
and an end point (expressed in terms of corpus positions in the token sequence),
and possibly an annotation value. In the input format used by B<cwb-encode>,
these are typically expressed by XML tags. This program, by contrast, expresses
the regions of a given s-attribute in a line-based format that is described below.

Command-line B<options> (which control the output format, etc.) must be specified 
before the I<corpus> name, while the B<attribute declarations> (which selects the attribute 
to be displayed) must follow the I<corpus> name. The corpus name is compulsory, and
must be given in the ALL-UPPERCASE version.

B<cwb-decode> will look for the specified corpus in the registry directory, as usual. If a registry
location is not specified with the B<-r> option, then either a directory specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY
environment variable, or CWB's built-in default registry will be used.


=head1 OPTIONS

Please note that the CWB utilities do not currently support GNU-style C<--long-options>.

=over 4

=item B<-n>

Turns off display of corpus position numbers.

=item B<-v>

Turns off display of annotation values.

=item B<-h>

Displays B<cwb-s-decode>'s help message, with short information about the usage of the command line options.  
This usage message will be also shown if B<cwb-s-decode> is called with invalid options.
After the usage message is printed, B<cwb-s-decode> will exit.

=item B<-r> I<registry_dir>

Specifies that the registry directory should be I<registry_dir> on startup,
instead of the standard registry. If this option is not specified, then a directory 
specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY environment variable will be used; if that is not available, 
the built-in CWB default will be used.

=back


=head1 ATTRIBUTE DECLARATION

=over 4

=item B<-S> I<attribute>

Declares that s-attribute I<attribute> should be printed 
(including annotations, if they are present).

=back


=head1 OUTPUT FORMAT

One line for each I<attribute> region in the corpus, with the following TAB-delimited fields:

=over 4

=item region start

The corpus position of the first token in the region.

=item region end

The corpus position of the last token in the region.

=item [ annotation ]

The string values of the s-attribute's annotations (only present if the s-attribute has annotations).

=back

The corpus positions can be suppressed with B<-n> and the values with B<-v>. Note it does
not make sense to use both these options.




=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item B<CORPUS_REGISTRY>

If set, this environment variable specifies the location of the corpus registry directory. 
The CORPUS_REGISTRY is overruled by the B<-r> option, if present; if neither of these means
of specifying the registry is used, then the built-in CWB default registry location will be used.

=back


=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqp>, L<cwb-describe-corpus>, L<cwb-s-encode>, L<cwb-decode>, L<cwb-lexdecode>, L<cwb-align-decode>, L<cwb-scan-corpus>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut


