=head1 NAME

cwb-compress-rdx - Utility that compresses the index files of a CWB corpus

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cwb-compress-rdx> [-d] [-D I<file>] [-T] [-r I<registry_dir>] [-f I<prefix>]
    ( -P I<attribute> | -A ) I<corpus>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This utility compresses the index files of a positional attribute (p-attribute). It
works on the binary format files produced by B<cwb-makeall>.

None of the options to B<cwb-compress-rdx> are compulsory. However, you must specify the corpus as an argument 
after all the options. The corpus name must be given in the ALL-UPPERCASE version.

B<cwb-compress-rdx> will look for the specified corpus in the registry directory, as usual. If a registry
location is not specified with the B<-r> option, then either a directory specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY
environment variable, or CWB's built-in default registry will be used.

When B<cwb-compress-rdx> runs, it creates C<.crc> and C<.crx> files, 
which replace the corresponding C<.corpus.rev> and C<.corpus.rdx> files. After you have run this tool successfully, 
these files can be deleted. A message to that effect is printed in B<cwb-compress-rdx>'s
standard output (these messages are indicated by beginning in C<!!>).

B<NB:> The recommended front-end for indexing and compression is the B<cwb-make> program 
supplied as part of the CWB/Perl interface. If you are using B<cwb-make>, you do not need to use this utility.



=head1 OPTIONS

Please note that no CWB programs currently support GNU-style C<--long-options>.

=over 4

=item B<-A>

Specifies that all of the corpus's p-attributes should be compressed. 

=item B<-d>
  
Activates debug mode. Progress messages on the compression will be printed to standard error. 

=item B<-D> I<file> 

Activates debug mode. Progress messages on the compression will be written (I<not> appended) to  I<file>.
If the file is specified as C<->, then progress messages will be printed to standard output.  

=item B<-f> I<prefix> 

Sets a prefix for the names of the output files. If specified, the compressed index files
will be contained in files C<I<prefix>.crc> and C<I<prefix>.crx>, rather 
than the standard filenames.

=item B<-h>

Displays B<cwb-compress-rdx>'s help message, with short information about the usage of the command line options.  
This usage message will be also shown if B<cwb-compress-rdx> is called with invalid options.
After the usage message is printed, B<cwb-compress-rdx> will exit.

=item B<-P> I<attribute>

Specifies that the p-attribute to be compressed is I<attribute>. If no p-attribute is specified,
(and the B<-A> switch is not used), then the default I<word> attribute will be compressed.

=item B<-r> I<registry_dir>

Specifies that the registry directory should be I<registry_dir> on startup,
instead of the standard registry. If this option is not specified, then a directory 
specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY environment variable will be used; if that is not available, 
the built-in CWB default will be used.

=item B<-T>

Allows the validation pass to be skipped. This is short for "I trust you"!

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item B<CORPUS_REGISTRY>

If set, this environment variable specifies the location of the corpus registry directory. 
The CORPUS_REGISTRY is overruled by the B<-r> option, if present; if neither of these means
of specifying the registry is used, then the built-in CWB default registry location will be used.

=back


=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqp>, L<cwb-encode>, L<cwb-makeall>, L<cwb-huffcode>, L<cwb-describe-corpus>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

=over 4

=item
B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

=item
Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

=item
Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

=back

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut

