=head1 NAME

cwb-config - Display CWB configuration and installation paths

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cwb-config> [--version | --prefix | --bindir | --libdir | --incdir | --mandir | --cflags | --ldflags | --registry | --default-registry | --help]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<cwb-config> is a utility for displaying information about the configuration of CWB on your system.  You must give
a single option to specify what bit of information you want. Only one piece of information can be requested at a time. 

Please note that B<cwb-config> is not yet available for Windows versions of CWB.

=head1 OPTIONS

Since this utility is implemented as a shell scipt rather than as a binary program,
it is able to support GNU-style C<--long-options>, unlike the other CWB utilities.

=over 4

=item B<--bindir>

Prints the install location of the CWB binaries.

=item B<--cflags or -I>

Prints the compiler flags for linking against the CL library. For use with GCC or other standard CC.

=item B<--default-registry or -d>

Prints the default registry directory compiled into CWB.

=item B<--help or -h>

Displays a help page with usage information.

=item B<--incdir>

Prints the install location of C header files. You will need this path to compile programs that
use CL functions. However, if you are using GCC or compatible Unix C compiler, it is easier to use
the B<-I> option.

=item B<--ldflags or -L>

Prints the linker flags for linking against the CL library. For use with GCC or other standard CC.

=item B<--libdir>

Prints the install location of the CL library file. You will need this path to link against that library.
However, if you are using GCC or compatible Unix C compiler, it is easier to use the B<-L> option.

=item B<--mandir>

Prints the install location of the manual pages.

=item B<--prefix>

Prints the CWB installation prefix, that is, the basis for the different installation paths
(note: this may have been overridden during installation).

=item B<--registry or -r>

Prints the effective registry directory or directories (that is, it will print the CORPUS_REGISTRY
environment variable, if set, and the built-in CWB default registry otherwise).

=item B<--version or -v>

Prints the number of the currently installed version of CWB.

=back


=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqp>, L<cqpserver>, L<cwb-align>, L<cwb-align-show>, L<cwb-align-encode>, L<cwb-align-decode>, L<cwb-atoi>, L<cwb-compress-rdx>,
L<cwb-decode-nqrfile>, L<cwb-decode>, L<cwb-describe-corpus>, L<cwb-encode>, L<cwb-huffcode>, 
L<cwb-itoa>, L<cwb-lexdecode>, L<cwb-makeall>, L<cwb-scan-corpus>, L<cwb-s-decode>, L<cwb-s-encode>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

=over 4

=item
B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

=item
Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

=item
Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

=back

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut

