=head1 NAME

cwb-decode - Utility for decoding a CWB corpus into various text formats

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cwb-decode> (-L|-H|-C|-Cx|-X) [-n] [-r I<registry_dir>]
    [-s I<start>] [-e I<end>] [-p | -f I<file>] [-Sp | -Sf I<file>]
    I<corpus>  [-c I<attribute>] [-ALL]
    (-P I<attribute>|-S I<attribute>|-V I<attribute>|-A I<attribute>)+

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<cwb-decode> extracts an encoded CWB corpus as plain text (or in various other text formats). 

In normal mode, the entire corpus (or a segment specified with the C<-s> and C<-e> options) 
is printed.

In matchlist mode (C<-p> or C<-f>), (pairs of) corpus positions are read from standard input 
or a file specified with C<-f>, and the corresponding tokens or ranges are displayed.

In subcorpus mode (C<-Sp> or C<-Sf>), all s-attribute start and end tags in the corpus are printed,
but tokens (i.e. p-attributes) outside the selected ranges are suppressed.  Since B<cwb-encode> 
ignores empty s-attribute regions, subcorpus mode can be used to create a physical subcorpus for
a sequence of cpos ranges.

In either case, the output is to standard output; any accompanying error or warning messages are printed to
standard error. 

The attribute declaration flags C<-P>, C<-S>, C<-V> and C<-A> determine which attributes will be printed; 
use C<-ALL> for all attributes. 

See L<"OUTPUT FORMATS"> below for available output modes. If no output format is specified, Standard format will be used.

Command-line B<options> (which control the output format, range of corpus positions, etc.) 
must be specified before the I<corpus> name, while B<attribute declarations> (which select attributes 
to be displayed) must follow the I<corpus> name. The corpus name is compulsory, and
must be given in the ALL-UPPERCASE version.

B<cwb-decode> will look for the specified corpus in the registry directory, as usual. If a registry
location is not specified with the B<-r> option, then either a directory specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY
environment variable, or CWB's built-in default registry will be used.




=head1 OPTIONS

Please note that the CWB utilities do not currently support GNU-style C<--long-options>.

=over 4

=item B<-C>

Activates compact output mode (suitable for piping to B<cwb-encode>).

=item B<-Cx>

Activates XML-compatible compact output mode (for C<cwb-encode -x ...>).

=item B<-e> I<end>

Specifies the end point (inclusive) for output; the last token printed will be corpus position I<end>.

=item B<-f> I<file>

Activates matchlist mode (with input from I<file>). Files with extension C<.gz> or C<.bz2> are automatically decompressed.

=item B<-h>

Displays B<cwb-decode>'s help message, with short information about the usage of the command line options.  
This usage message will be also shown if B<cwb-decode> is called with invalid options.
After the usage message is printed, B<cwb-decode> will exit.

=item B<-H>

Activates concordance line ('horizontal') output mode.

=item B<-L>

Activates Lisp output mode.

=item B<-n>

Activates printing of corpus positions ("numbers") alongside each token. The precise format of the corpus
positions depends on which output mode is activated. For instance, they will appear as attribute values
in XML mode; as line-start labels in standard mode.

=item B<-p>

Activates matchlist mode (with input from standard input).

=item B<-r> I<registry_dir>

Specifies that the registry directory should be I<registry_dir> on startup,
instead of the standard registry. If this option is not specified, then a directory 
specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY environment variable will be used; if that is not available, 
the built-in CWB default will be used.

=item B<-s> I<start>

Specifies the start point for output; the first token printed will be corpus position I<start>.

=item B<-Sf> I<file>

Activates subcorpus mode (with input from I<file>).

=item B<-Sp>

Activates subcorpus mode (with input from standard input).

=item B<-X>

Activates XML output mode.

=back


=head1 ATTRIBUTE DECLARATIONS

=over 4

=item B<-P> I<attribute>

Declares that p-attribute I<attribute> should be printed.

=item B<-S> I<attribute>

Declares that s-attribute I<attribute> should be printed 
(possibly including annotations, if they are present).

=item B<-V> I<attribute>  

In matchlist mode only, declares that the s-attribute annotation that surrounds each input range should be printed.
Note that it does not normally make sense to declare the same s-attribute with both B<-S> and B<-V>.

=item B<-A> I<attribute>

Declares that a-attribute I<attribute> should be printed.

=item B<-ALL>

Declares that all p-attributes and s-attributes should be printed. 
A-attributes must still be added manually, if required.


=item B<-c> I<attribute>

Sets a context attribute. In matchlist mode only, each range will be expanded to a full containing I<attribute> region.
In "normal" mode with concordance style output, each individual token will be printed within its full
containing I<attribute>.

=back


=head1 OUTPUT FORMATS

=over 4

=item B<Standard output>

This output mode is used if no other mode is explicitly specified.

Each token is printed on a separate line. Corpus position numbers, if activated, are printed
at the start of the line, followed by a colon. All types of attributes are printed on the
line, each one separateed by tabs. The form for p-attributes is an
C<I<attribute>=I<value>> pair. S-attributes and a-attributes are given as 
C<< I<<attribute>>:I<start>-I<end> >> and C<< I<start1>-I<end1>==>I<attribute>:I<start2>-I<end2> >>
respectively.

In matchlist mode, if a context attribute is being used, it is printed as
a line at the start of each match: this begins with TARGET or INTERVAL,
followed by (respectively) one or two integers indicating the extent of the
context being shown.

"Surrounding" s-attribute values in matchlist mode are shown on a single line each,
in the form C<< <I<attribute> I<value>> >> .


=item B<Compact output>

This output format is designed so that it can also serve as input to B<cwb-encode>.

As in standard mode, one token is printed per line. However, only p-attributes are
shown on token lines. S-attributes and a-attributes are instead shown on separate
lines, in pseudo-XML-esque form. 

S-attributes are printed in the form C<< <I<attribute> I<annotation>> >> ,
with simple closing tags.
A-attributes are given as simple unvalued tags, unless printing of token numbers
is enabled, in which case the a-attribute tags will contain a pair of numbers
representing the start and end points of the corresponding region in the aligned corpus.
These numbers will also appear in the closing tag of the a-attribute. 

In matchlist mode, if a context attribute is being used, it is not actually printed.

In matchlist mdoe, the values of "surrounding" s-attributes are shown in the form
of a comment - a line formatted as C<# I<attribute>=I<value>> . These comments
may need to be stripped before the output is sent to B<cwb-encode>.


=item B<XML-compatible compact output>

This is the same as compact output, except that:

=over 4

=item *

Strings are printed with certain characters ( C<< " ' < > & >> ) represented by the 
corresponding XML entities.

=item *

There is an XML declaration at the start of the output.

=item *

The whole output is wrapped in a C<< <corpus> >> element, or a C<< <matchlist> >> element 
in matchlist mode.

=back

Note that in contrast to XML output, the individual tokens are I<not> represented
by XML structures, and the tags indicating s-attributes and a-attributes are not different
from their form in normal compact mode.


=item B<Concordance-line ("horizontal") output>

This mode makes B<cwb-decode>'s output resemble the format of a CQP concordance as
closely as possible. Most types of attribute are shown in a very similar way to 
how they appear in compact output mode. However, they are adjusted so that many
tokens can be presented on a single line.

For example, corpus position numbers are shown at the start of each line (where
requested), rather than repeatedly on the line alongside every token. This matches
the formatting used by CQP. 

S-attributes and a-attributes are shown in the same pseudo-XML format as in compact mode,
but on the same line.

It's important to note that in "normal" mode, you will still only see one token per line
(because only one token at a time is being printed) - although you can use a context
s-attribute to expand the number of tokens printed on each line, there will still be one line
per token. It is in matchlist mode that this output format is especially useful.

Tokens are separated by spaces. In matchlist mode, sequences of tokens are separated by newline
characters. Within each token, p-attributes are delimited by the forward slash. Note
that forward-slash is not escaped in any way when it occurs as part of one of the 
p-attributes' values.

In matchlist mode, if a context attribute is used, it is not actually printed.

The values of "surrounding" s-attributes in matchlist mode are shown as
the same kind of pseudo-XML tag used in standard mode, but this is set off
from the remainder of the line with a colon, as follows: C<< <I<attribute> I<value>>: >>



=item B<Lisp output mode>

All data structures are represented as well-formed list objects in B<(>parenthesesB<)>. 

P-attribute values are given in the form C<(I<attribute_name> I<attribute_value>)>. These are, in
turn, contained in a single list per token (which will begin with the corpus position number,
if the B<-n> option has been selected).

When a context attribute is being used (B<-c>), the set of tokens (in matchlist mode) is then contained in a
C<(TARGET I<cpos>...)> structure. Additonally, if more than one token is contained within this TARGET,
the first object within the TARGET list is an C<INTERVAL I<from_cpos> I<to_cpos>)> structure.

In matchlist mode, each sequence of matches begins with a C<CONTEXT I<from_cpos> I<to_cpos>)> structure.


=item B<XML output>

An XML declaration is given at the start of the output.

Strings are printed with certain characters ( C<< " ' < > & >> ) represented by the 
corresponding XML entities.

The whole output is wrapped in a C<< <corpus> >> element, or a C<< <matchlist> >> element with groups 
of C<< <match> >> elements in matchlist mode.

Each token is contained in a C<< <token> >> element. 
The contents of the p-attributes within each token are given in the form 
C<< <attr name="...">...</attr> >> .

Token numbers, where requested, are given as C<cpos> attributes on the C<< <token> >> elements. 
Corpus positions (start and end) will also be shown on elements representing a-attributes and 
s-attributes if numbers have been requested. 

S-attributes and p-attributes are printed before the token element they are associated with, in the form
C<< <align type="start" target="..." /> >> and C<< <tag type="start" name="..." /> >> .
The end points, printed after the token elements they are associated, are the same, except that I<type> is 
given as I<end>.

In matchlist mode, the values of "surrounding" s-attributes declared with B<-V> 
are given before the contents of each match, in the form C<< <element name="..." value="..."/> >> . 

In matchlist mode, if extended context is requested with the B<-c> declaration, this is shown in the form
C<< <context start="I<cpos>" end="I<cpos>"/> >> .


=back


=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item B<CORPUS_REGISTRY>

If set, this environment variable specifies the location of the corpus registry directory. 
The CORPUS_REGISTRY is overruled by the B<-r> option, if present; if neither of these means
of specifying the registry is used, then the built-in CWB default registry location will be used.

=back


=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqp>, L<cwb-describe-corpus>, L<cwb-encode>, L<cwb-s-decode>, L<cwb-lexdecode>, L<cwb-align-decode>, L<cwb-scan-corpus>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut

