=head1 NAME

cwb-decode-nqrfile - Decode CWB's binary file format for named query results

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cwb-decode-nqrfile> [-h] [+h] I<file>


=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program decodes the contents of a saved CQP query (or a "subcorpus": query results and
subcorpora are essentially the same thing, since both represent a collection of subsets
of token positions in the corpus). These are called "named query results" because they
are created by storing a query as a named variable in CQP, and then issuing the C<save> command
for that named variable.

The resulting file is a binary file consisting of sets of integers representing the "zones"
within the corpus that matched the original query. The B<cwb-decode-nqrfile> utility
processes this file, and prints out the corpus positions as ASCII integers on standard output.

When B<cwb-decode-nqrfile> is invoked, a full (relative or absolute) path to I<file> must be
specified. B<cwb-decode-nqrfile> does not know anything about the corpus registry or about
CQP's data directory settings.

Alternatively, I<file> can be given as C<-> , in which B<cwb-decode-nqrfile> will read data
from standard input.

=head1 OPTIONS

Please note that the CWB utilities do not currently support GNU-style C<--long-options>.

=over 4

=item B<-h>

Turn off "print-header" mode.

=item B<+h>

Turns on "print-header" mode. Note that the default is for this mode to be switched on,
so this option is not usually needed.

=back


=head1 OUTPUT FORMAT

First, a header is printed (if "print-header" mode is on!). This contains three fields:

=over 4

=item REGISTRY

The path to the registry directory of the original corpus.

=item O_NAME

The name of the original corpus on which the query was carried out.

=item SIZE

The number of intervals in this subcorpus (= number of results in a query).

=back

After that, a number of lines equal to SIZE are printed. Each line contains
two integers, separated by a tab, which represent the start and end points
of the intervals wihtin the original corpus that are included in this
subcorpus.


=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqp>, L<cqpcl>, L<cqpserver>, L<cwb-describe-corpus>, L<cwb-decode>, L<cwb-scan-corpus>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut

