=head1 NAME

cwb-describe-corpus - Display information about a CWB-encoded corpus

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cwb-describe-corpus> [-sdh] [-r I<registry_dir>] I<corpus> ...


=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program displays information about a CWB-encoded corpus. All information is printed to the program's
standard output.

By default, only basic information (corpus size, location of the data files, and so on), plus a list of corpus
attributes, will be printed. However you can use the B<-s> and/or B<-d> options to get (respectively) additional
attribute statistics and additional details about the component files of each attribute. 

None of the options to B<cwb-describe-corpus> are compulsory. However, you must specify the corpus as an argument 
after all the options. The corpus name must be given in the ALL-UPPERCASE version. You can specify multiple
corpora, and information about each one will be printed in turn.

B<cwb-describe-corpus> will look for the specified corpus or corpora in the registry directory, as usual. If a registry
location is not specified with the B<-r> option, then either a directory specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY
environment variable, or CWB's built-in default registry will be used.


=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-d>

Shows file details. When this option is given, detailed information about the files making up each
corpus attribute will be shown. Note that this is usually a debug setting, as the information
shown is not of interest to most users.

=item B<-h>

Displays B<cwb-describe-corpus>'s help message, with short information about the usage of the command line options.  
This usage message will be also shown if B<cwb-describe-corpus> is called with invalid options.
After the usage message is printed, B<cwb-describe-corpus> will exit.

=item B<-r> I<registry_dir>

Specifies that the registry directory should be I<registry_dir> on startup,
instead of the standard registry. If this option is not specified, then a directory 
specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY environment variable will be used; if that is not available, 
the built-in CWB default will be used.

=item B<-s>

Shows attribute statistics. When this option is given, information about the size of each encoded attribute will be
printed (number of tokens and types for a p-attribute, number of regions for an s-attribute, and number of alignment
blocks for an a-attribute).

=back


=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item B<CORPUS_REGISTRY>

If set, this environment variable specifies the location of the corpus registry directory. 
The CORPUS_REGISTRY is overruled by the B<-r> option, if present; if neither of these means
of specifying the registry is used, then the built-in CWB default registry location will be used.

=back


=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqp>, L<cqpcl>, L<cqpserver>, L<cwb-encode>, L<cwb-makeall>, L<cwb-huffcode>, L<cwb-compress-rdx>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut
