=head1 NAME

cwb-lexdecode - Access lexicon of token-level annotations in a CWB corpus

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cwb-lexdecode> [-fnlbsh] [-r I<registry_dir>] [-P I<attribute>]
    [-p I<regexp> [-cd]] [-F I<file> [-0N]]  I<corpus>

B<cwb-lexdecode> [-r I<registry_dir>] [-P I<attribute>] -S I<corpus>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This utility can be used to print all or part of the lexicon of a positional
attribute to standard output. Optionally, frequency information can also be
printed.

There are several ways to print out only a part of the p-attribute. If a file
input is specified, words will be read from that file (on a line-by-line basis)
and the matching lexicon entries output in the same order they are encountered.
The file can also specify which items are to be printed by giving lexicon ID
numbers: for this mode, use the B<-N> option.
The file input can be from standard input if C<-F -> is specified; this allows
both piping and a rudimentary interactive mode.

Alternatively, a regular expression can be specified (with B<-p>); in this
case only entries that match that regular expression will be printed out. This
is a normal CWB regular expression, and so all the usual rules for
string-level regular expressions in CQP apply: the PCRE syntax for regular
expressions is used, the regexp matches the whole item, and it is
case-sensitive and accent-sensitive by default.  Case-sensitivity and
accent-sensitivity can be turned off with the B<-c> and B<-d> flags
respectively.

Command-line B<options> must be specified before the I<corpus> name. The
corpus name is compulsory, and must be given in the ALL-UPPERCASE version.

B<cwb-lexdecode> will look for the specified corpus in the registry directory,
as usual. If a registry location is not specified with the B<-r> option, then
either a directory specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY environment variable, or
CWB's built-in default registry will be used.


=head1 OPTIONS

Please note that the CWB utilities do not currently support GNU-style C<--long-options>.

=over 4

=item B<-0>

Allows zero-frequency output for items that do not exist in the lexicon. In file-input
mode (reading strings, not integers), specification of an item that is not found in the lexicon will usually result
in an error message to standard error and nothing to standard output. But if B<-0>
is set, it will instead result in a zero-frequency item being printed to standard
output.

=item B<-b>

Turns off the use of extra "blanks" (spaces) to pad numeric columns to a fixed width.
By default, the frequency (B<-f>), string-length (B<-l>) and lexicon ID number (B<-n>)
columns are printed with extra spaces used as necessary to fill up a minimum width
of seven characters; this option inhibits this behaviour.

=item B<-c>

Turns off case-sensitivity in regexp matching (only useful with B<-p> I<regexp>). 
This corresponds directly to the C<%c> flag in CQP-syntax.

=item B<-d>

Turns off accent-sensitivity in regexp matching (only useful with B<-p> I<regexp>). 
This corresponds directly to the C<%d> flag in CQP-syntax. (In both cases, the 'd'
is for "diacritics".)

=item B<-f>

Displays the corpus frequency of each item that is printed out.

=item B<-F> I<file>

Activates file-input mode. The specified I<file> is opened and read, one line
at a time (files with suffix C<.gz> are automatically decompressed; use C<->
to read from standard input). Each line is treated as a single word or
annotation string, and the corresponding lexicon entry is printed. Note that
only precise, character-for-character matches are found; no regexp matching is
used.
Also note that the B<-N> option changes this behaviour significantly: numbers
are expected in the input file instead.

=item B<-h>

Displays B<cwb-lexdecode>'s help message, with short information about the usage of the command line options.  
This usage message will be also shown if B<cwb-lexdecode> is called with invalid options.
After the usage message is printed, B<cwb-lexdecode> will exit.

=item B<-l>

Displays the string-length of each item that is printed out.

=item B<-n>

Displays the internal lexicon ID number of each item that is printed out.

=item B<-N>

In file-input mode, switches the expected format of the input from strings which
are matched against the lexicon entries (the default), to integers that represent
the internal ID numbers of the p-attribute's lexicon.

=item B<-p> I<regexp>

Prints out only lexicon entries that match the specified I<regexp>. 

=item B<-P> I<attribute>

Specifies that the p-attribute to be decoded is I<attribute>. If no p-attribute is specified, 
then the default I<word> attribute will be compressed.

=item B<-r> I<registry_dir>

Specifies that the registry directory should be I<registry_dir> on startup,
instead of the standard registry. If this option is not specified, then a directory 
specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY environment variable will be used; if that is not available, 
the built-in CWB default will be used.

=item B<-s>

Sorts the output alphabetically  by item. Normally, the internal order of the lexicon is
used (which typically represents the order in which the different types were originally
encountered when the corpus was being encoded). 

=item B<-S>

Specifies that only the size (in types and tokens) of this p-attribute should be printed.
No individual lexicon entries are output in this mode. Note that if this option is given,
the B<-F> and B<-p> options are ignored.

=back


=head1 OUTPUT FORMAT

One line for each (selected) lexicon entry with the following TAB-delimited fields:

=over 4

=item B<[ lexicon id ]>

The internal lexicon ID number (only shown with the B<-n> option).

=item B<[ frequency ]>

The frequency of this lexicon item in the corpus (only shown with the B<-f> option).

=item B<[ length ]>

The length of the p-attribute (word or annotation) string (only shown with the B<-l> option).

=item B<string>

The actual p-attribute annotation string itself (always shown).

=back


=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item B<CORPUS_REGISTRY>

If set, this environment variable specifies the location of the corpus registry directory. 
The CORPUS_REGISTRY is overruled by the B<-r> option, if present; if neither of these means
of specifying the registry is used, then the built-in CWB default registry location will be used.

=back


=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqp>, L<cwb-describe-corpus>, L<cwb-encode>, L<cwb-decode>, L<cwb-s-decode>, L<cwb-align-decode>, L<cwb-scan-corpus>.


=head1 COPYRIGHT

B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut

