=head1 NAME

cwb-makeall - Utility that builds indexes for an encoded CWB corpus.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cwb-makeall> [-D] [-V] [-r I<registry_dir>]
    [-M I<megabytes>] [-P I<attribute>] [-c I<component>]
    I<corpus> [ I<attribute> ... ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This utility creates a lexicon and index for each p-attribute of an encoded CWB corpus. This is an 
essential step before the corpus can be queried. Before using B<cwb-makeall>, the corpus must have
been encoded into CWB's binary format using B<cwb-encode>. B<NB:> The recommended front-end for indexing 
and compression is the B<cwb-make> program supplied as part of the CWB/Perl interface. 
If you are using B<cwb-make>, you do not need to use this utility.

None of the options to B<cwb-makeall> are compulsory. However, you must specify the corpus as an argument 
after all the options. The corpus name must be given in the ALL-UPPERCASE version.

B<cwb-makeall> will look for the specified corpus in the registry directory, as usual. If a registry
location is not specified with the B<-r> option, then either a directory specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY
environment variable, or CWB's built-in default registry will be used.

By default, as noted above, B<cwb-makeall> processes all p-attributes of a given corpus.
However, there are two ways to specify that it should only run on certain p-attributes:
first, a list of attributes can be given after the I<corpus> argument;
or alternatively, the B<-P> option can be used to specify one single attribute to process.  



=head1 OPTIONS

Please note that the CWB utilities do not currently support GNU-style C<--long-options>.

=over 4

=item B<-c> I<component> 

Specifies that only component I<component> should be created. The internal format of a CWB attribute-index
is made up of a set of I<components>; by default, all components are created when an attribute is indexed.
Most users do not need to understand how this works, and therefore do not need to use this option. Note that 
only a single component can be specified in this way.

=item B<-D>

Activates debug mode; additional messages about what B<cwb-makeall> is doing will be printed on standard error.

=item B<-h>

Displays B<cwb-makeall>'s help message, with short information about the usage of the command line options.  
This usage message will be also shown if B<cwb-makeall> is called with invalid options.
After the usage message is printed, B<cwb-makeall> will exit.

=item B<-M> I<megabytes> 

Specified an approximate memory-usage limit of I<megabytes> MB. This can be useful when indexing large corpora,
especially on a shared machine. The amount specified should be somewhat less than the amount of physical 
RAM available.

=item B<-P> I<attribute>

Specifies the p-attribute to be indexed. If this option is not specified (which is the normal usage), 
then B<cwb-makeall> will by default process all p-attributes declared in the
corpus's registry entry. Note that only one P-attribute can be specified using this option.
Note also that this option will be ignored if any attributes have been specified as arguments
following the name of the corpus.

=item B<-r> I<registry_dir>

Specifies that the registry directory should be I<registry_dir> on startup,
instead of the standard registry. If this option is not specified, then a directory 
specified by the CORPUS_REGISTRY environment variable will be used; if that is not available, 
the built-in CWB default will be used.

=item B<-V>

Enables additional validation passes when an index is created and when data files are
compressed. It is recommended to use this otpion with small corproa. However - depending 
on your hardware - you should omit B<-V> when encoding very large corpora (above 50 million tokens), in
order to speed up processing. 

=back



=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item B<CORPUS_REGISTRY>

If set, this environment variable specifies the location of the corpus registry directory. 
The CORPUS_REGISTRY is overruled by the B<-r> option, if present; if neither of these means
of specifying the registry is used, then the built-in CWB default registry location will be used.

=back



=head1 SEE ALSO

L<cqp>, L<cqpcl>, L<cqpserver>, L<cwb-encode>, L<cwb-huffcode>, L<cwb-compress-rdx>, L<cwb-describe-corpus>.


=head1 COPYRIGHT

B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut

